Document the ISA (#221)
powdr-labs/womir-openvm: ISA.md

### Address Spaces

Address spaces 1, 2, and 3 are the same as in OpenVM's RISC-V implementation. Address space 5 is added by WOMIR-OpenVM for frame pointer storage.

| AS | Constant | Purpose |
|----|----------|---------|
| 1 | `RV32_REGISTER_AS` | Register file (4-byte-aligned u8 cells) |
| 2 | `RV32_MEMORY_AS` | Linear memory (WebAssembly heap) |
| 3 | `PUBLIC_VALUES_AS` | Public outputs |
| 5 | `FP_AS` | Frame pointer storage (1 native field element at address 0) |

### Instruction Encoding

Instructions have 8 fields: `opcode, a, b, c, d, e, f, g`. The encoding varies by instruction format.

#### R-type (register-register-register)

Used by ALU, shift, comparison, and equality instructions.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| a | `RV32_REGISTER_NUM_LIMBS * rd` |
| b | `RV32_REGISTER_NUM_LIMBS * rs1` |
| c | `RV32_REGISTER_NUM_LIMBS * rs2` |
| d | 1 (register AS) |
| e | 1 (register AS) |

#### I-type (register-register-immediate)

Used by ALU/shift/comparison instructions with an immediate operand.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| a | `RV32_REGISTER_NUM_LIMBS * rd` |
| b | `RV32_REGISTER_NUM_LIMBS * rs1` |

> | c | `AluImm`-encoded 16-bit signed immediate (low 16 bits = value, byte 2 = sign extension, byte 3 = 0) |

Author: It uses `AluImm` which seems to accept only `i16`: https://github.com/powdr-labs/womir-openvm/blob/main/integration/src/instruction_builder.rs#L17

| e | 0 |
| f | 1 (enabled) |
| g | 0 |

**Semantics:** Writes `(imm_hi << 16) | imm_lo` as 4 little-endian bytes to the target register.

---

## Control Flow

### Call / Return

Opcodes from `CallOpcode`, offset `0x1236`.

#### RET

Return to a saved PC and restore the frame pointer.

**Precondition:** `RET` will only receive values that were previously written by a `CALL` or `CALL_INDIRECT`. The target PC and FP registers must contain valid saved values.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| a | 0 |
| b | 0 |
| c | `RV32_REGISTER_NUM_LIMBS * to_pc_reg` (register offset holding saved PC, relative to current FP) |
| d | `RV32_REGISTER_NUM_LIMBS * to_fp_reg` (register offset holding saved FP, relative to current FP) |
| e | 1 (PC read from register AS) |
| f | 1 (FP read from register AS) |
| g | 0 |

**Semantics:**
1. Read current FP from FP_AS.
2. Read new PC from register `[FP + c]`.
3. Read new FP (absolute value) from register `[FP + d]`.
4. Update FP_AS with new FP.
5. Set PC = new PC.

#### CALL

Call a function at an immediate PC address.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| a | `RV32_REGISTER_NUM_LIMBS * save_pc` (where to save return PC, relative to **new** FP) |

> | b | `RV32_REGISTER_NUM_LIMBS * save_fp` (where to save old FP, relative to **new** FP) |

Author: ```suggestion
| b | `RV32_REGISTER_NUM_LIMBS * save_fp` (where to save the current FP, relative to **new** FP) |
```

| d | `fp_offset` (added to current FP to compute new FP) |
| e | 1 (PC from register) |
| f | 0 (FP from immediate offset) |
| g | 0 |

**Semantics:** Same as `CALL`, except the target PC is read from register `[FP + c]` instead of being an immediate.

### Jump

Opcodes from `JumpOpcode`, offset `0x123B`.

#### JUMP

Unconditional jump to an immediate PC.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| a | `to_pc_imm` |
| b | 0 |
| c | 0 |
| d | 0 |
| e | 0 |
| f | 1 (enabled) |
| g | 0 |

**Semantics:** Set PC = a.

#### SKIP

Unconditional relative jump by a register-specified offset.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| a | 0 |
| b | `RV32_REGISTER_NUM_LIMBS * offset_reg` |
| c | 0 |
| d | 0 |
| e | 0 |
| f | 1 (enabled) |
| g | 0 |

**Semantics:** Read offset from register `[FP + b]`. Set `PC += (offset + 1) * DEFAULT_PC_STEP`. The `+1` accounts for WOMIR's natural PC increment — without it, offset 0 would loop forever.

#### JUMP_IF

Conditional jump to an immediate PC if condition register is non-zero.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| a | `to_pc_imm` |
| b | `RV32_REGISTER_NUM_LIMBS * condition_reg` |
| c | 0 |
| d | 0 |
| e | 0 |

> | f | 1 (enabled) |

Author: Can remove this enabled stuff

| g | 0 |

**Semantics:** Read condition from register `[FP + b]`. If non-zero, set PC = a. Otherwise, PC += DEFAULT_PC_STEP.

#### JUMP_IF_ZERO

Conditional jump to an immediate PC if condition register is zero.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| a | `to_pc_imm` |
| b | `RV32_REGISTER_NUM_LIMBS * condition_reg` |
| c | 0 |
| d | 0 |
| e | 0 |

> | f | 1 (enabled) |

Author: Can remove this enabled stuff

| `loadb` | `LOADB` | `rd = sign_extend(MEM8[rs1 + imm])` — load byte, sign-extend to 32 bits |
| `loadbu` | `LOADBU` | `rd = zero_extend(MEM8[rs1 + imm])` — load byte, zero-extend to 32 bits |
| `loadh` | `LOADH` | `rd = sign_extend(MEM16[rs1 + imm])` — load halfword, sign-extend to 32 bits |
| `loadhu` | `LOADHU` | `rd = zero_extend(MEM16[rs1 + imm])` — load halfword, zero-extend to 32 bits |

### Store Instructions

| Instruction | Opcode | Semantics |
|-------------|--------|-----------|
| `storew` | `STOREW` | `MEM32[rs1 + imm] = rs2` — store 32-bit word |
| `storeb` | `STOREB` | `MEM8[rs1 + imm] = rs2[7:0]` — store lowest byte |
| `storeh` | `STOREH` | `MEM16[rs1 + imm] = rs2[15:0]` — store lowest halfword |

### Reveal (Public Output)

`reveal` uses `STOREW` with memory AS = 3 (`PUBLIC_VALUES_AS`) to write a register value into the public output area.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| a | `RV32_REGISTER_NUM_LIMBS * data_reg` |
| b | `RV32_REGISTER_NUM_LIMBS * index_reg` |
| c | 0 (or immediate index) |
| d | 1 (register AS) |
| e | 3 (public values AS) |
| f | 1 (enabled) |
| g | 0 |

---

## Hint Stream Instructions

> ### Phantom Instructions

Author: Note that copied from OpenVM
